So the first thing that I think is really important for producers is to break this idea that BRX is sugar.
We're really using this as a shorthand. We're using BRX as another word for sugar.
And I'd just like to use this slide as a reminder that BRX is a concentration.
When we're measuring the mucilage, we're measuring a concentration of dissolved something in
the mucilage.
And most of that is sugar, so it kind of works as a shorthand.
But unfortunately, we've kind of forgotten the other part, that there's other things
dissolved in there.
And then it's a concentration, so we're just like, "Oh, more sugar, more butter," because
we want more sweetness.
Like that's one of the biggest asks of coffee is like, be sweet.
So I've had to like walk back a little bit because I do use a refractometer, as you've seen.
I use it to measure the fruit that's coming in and I use it to measure my fermentation.
But it's not the most useful measurement in coffee.
It's not the most, like it's not indispensable.
And yet it's like the most accessible.
It's the easiest to do.
So you kind of see everybody doing it.
So I just want to remind both producers and consumers that this is not a very helpful
measurement.
It's a very fuzzy measurement.
And this is because we have this idea that bricks and quality have something to do with
each other because we want more sugar, so higher sugar is good, so I guess it's better
coffee.
And the problem with that is that we can have these two cherries that have the same bricks,
but they're obviously very different maturity levels. So bricks can be a very,
what's the word, engañador, like a very deceitful measurement. And so maturity is a good indicator.
If you have ripe fruit, you will have higher quality coffee. You definitely want mature
fruit to get her coffee. But brix is a poor indicator of maturity. Brix doesn't really tell
you how mature your fruit is, how developed it is. It just gives you this idea of a concentration.
And what is a really good measurement is color, using your eyes. And so I think one of the things
that we've kind of can fall into this trap with coffee is, you know, coffee is very
We use our hands a lot, we use our eyes, we use our noses, and we think, "No, we should
be more scientific.
We should upgrade.
We should have tools.
We should measure these things."
And in some ways, that's led us astray, especially with bricks.
Now producers, instead of using their eyes to see how ripe something is, they started
going for a number, and in a lot of cases, that's really reduced the quality of coffee.
So I really want to, I don't know, just really put into question how we're using this measurement.
Because if we think about it, the brix is measuring the juice on the outside.
But we don't care about the juice.
We drink the seed.
We want to know what the seed is doing.
And actually, our skin has way more correlation to our seed because that was the clue for
animals to come and eat the fruit, digest it, and poop it out somewhere else and make
a new plant.
So there's a much stronger connection between the seed and the skin than the seed and the
juice around it, right?
So that's another problem that I have with coffee, that we measure bricks, because we're
measuring the thing that we throw away.
We throw away the pulp, we throw away the juice, and we're not looking at our seed.
And so, yeah, it's just like for me a very weird backwards way of like trying to talk
about qualities.
I still measure bricks because I do want to know my juice for my fermentation.
So it's not that it's completely useless, but we're not using it in a very, very smart
way in coffee.
So this is just like a study that did that they did in Brazil to be able to look at does
do we have a correlation of bricks and the quality of coffee that's coming from these plots?
So they looked at, I think it was like five or six different farms in Brazil.
They took different bricks measurements and then they cupped the coffee and they said,
"Oh, are the better tasting ones the ones with higher bricks?"
And not only were they not, the best tasting ones were not the ones with the higher bricks,
but it was the opposite.
A lot of times the ones with the higher bricks were the worst performing in the cup.
And this is because, so this is just the idea that maturity and color have a much closer relationship
than maturity and bricks. And it's much better to decide by your particular tolerance on color
because what I've seen a lot of producers do is now they want to target a number. Now they say
we don't process anything unless it's 25 or above and they're really focusing on a number and
I'm trying to hit that.
And it takes a little bit of-- a little like a whole season
or a while to get that feedback.
But then the feedback comes like, oh, your coffee's
actually worse now.
Like, it's dropped in quality.
And the reason this concerns me is
because I've been with a lot of roasters who
buy armfuls of refractometers and give them out like candy
to all their producers and say, hit this target.
We want the coffee to be this high.
and they're inadvertently lowering the quality of the coffee.
So it's much better to decide, again, on a visual range of saying,
like, well, what we did, we have a little bit more overripes,
so maybe we're going to change our process this way,
or we have more underripe fruit, we're going to do something a little bit
differently, but to use color as a visual clue and not rely on bricks.
And so the reason why Brix still keeps coming up and keeps coming up is because we use it
in so many other industries.
We use it in all kinds of fruit industries.
Obviously we use it in wine.
Coffee wants to be like wine.
Let's use the tools that they're using.
Without understanding why winemakers use Brix.
And again, in all of these other industries, we're measuring the fruit because we eat the
fruit, right?
In strawberries, in tomatoes.
We are measuring the flesh and we eat the flesh.
And coffee, we're measuring the flesh and then we throw it away.
So in wine, this relationship is really direct and really clear.
If I measure the bricks of my grapes, I know how much alcohol I'm going to get.
It's about half.
So if I have 22 bricks, I'm going to get 11% alcohol.
Mathematically, at Carbons Via Range, I know how much alcohol I'm going to get, and my
alcohol tells me how much taxes I'm going to pay. If I'm above 14% I pay a lot more
taxes. If I'm below 14% I pay, I'm in a different tax bracket. So even in wine, Brix has nothing
to do with quality. It's not about fruit, it's about how much, it's a financial decision.
Do I have enough money to cover these taxes? Maybe I don't want to go so high. So even
in wine, it's not used for what we think it's used, and again, in all of these other situations,
bricks is the fruit that we're eating. In coffee there's so many transformational
steps that so many people want to make a connection between bricks and sweetness
in the cup and it is crazy. It is just insane that you could have anything to
say about the final cup quality and your bricks. In fact, the other, the only number
that I can really give you as a guideline is that above like 23 bricks
That's as much sugar as a fruit can accumulate.
Much higher. You're not accumulating more sugar, you're losing water.
You're dehydrating. You're concentrating that.
So it seems like it's higher, Brix, but you just have more dehydration,
potentially more stress, potentially more unhealthy fruit.
So that's why when producers were aiming for 27, 28,
these really, really high Brix numbers, they were getting worse coffee
because you were getting super overripe, which we've seen higher microbial charge,
higher chance of defects, and you're losing that acidity that's able to balance out your sugar in the first place.
So I'll stop for a second. I see some questions.
Have you seen like, did somebody would like, initially wanted to get over 23 and then rehydrate,
And have you seen any experiments in terms of rehydrating of the fruit again?
Like putting it in the water?
So you're saying if it was a really high brix and then they use water to bring it down?
Well, I'm not sure what that would accomplish because if it was really high,
you've already brought your microbial load.
You've already brought all of those defect potential microbes into your tank.
So reducing the bricks at that point is a little too late.
I think that's another point with bricks
is that it will really change if you do it in the morning,
if you do it at night, if you do it on a full moon,
if you do it on a new moon, because of how much water
the plant is absorbing.
It's not a consistent amount.
You have this transpiration fluctuation.
So it's not even a good number that is consistent to be making these important decisions off of.
So a lot of the times, it's like that "do as I say, not as I do." I measure it all the time.
I take this number a lot, but most of the time I want to tell producers, "forget about it."
It's the least important. pH is a much more useful measurement.
And again, I still do it because we follow it in the fermentation.
So this is more like, frix is not that useful
for fruit maturity and quality.
And one of the things that Alejandra shared
is she grows a lot of different varieties.
She grows Sudán Lume, she grows Senecafe,
she has her Geisha.
And for her, her Geisha, in her experience,
has never been above 17.
That's just like the top that it can reach.
And she has this other variety, the Senecafe variety,
that goes up to 22.
So it has a higher concentration.
But if you have that pleasure of tasting her geisha
that she brought with her,
I tried it right before we were sorting,
it is so sweet and it is so wonderful.
And she's like, "We just can't get the Senni Cafe
to get anywhere close to that sweetness
that the geisha just has at a much lower bricks."
So this idea that bricks and sweetness
in the cup are connected, get it out of your heads.
(laughs)
So yeah, so the point of BRX is it's not totally useless, but it's having it in contact.
So what we want to know is sort of like ripeness is this complex equation that I made up.
This is not a real calculation.
This is just a representation of how I think about it.
So I think about my ripeness being color, and I think about my sugar increasing.
And as my sugar is increasing, my acid is decreasing.
So this exchange is happening.
And then on the other side, I care about my phenolics.
So the phenolics in my skin and the phenolics in my seed, that all contributes to ripeness.
And all of this together gives me an idea of flavor.
So my problem is that we've just taken this one element and like blown it up and kind
of forgotten about everything else.
And the other thing I mentioned about the acid is when we're getting these super high
brix numbers, we are missing out on the acid that balances out our cup, that gives us that like
balanced, those balanced notes and the longevity. If we don't have this acid structure, we're not
going to have a coffee that can hang out for two years. And a lot of times when I taste these really
high brix coffees, they're very flat. Like part of the reason why they don't, they don't score as
as well is because they taste really flat and simple.
Because they're just really strong on one note
and they don't have this complexity.
So this is why in the methods that I use
for our fermentations, I'm very comfortable
lowering my tolerance for under-ripes.
Like if we can pulp it, I want some of that acid
to carry that coffee a lot longer.
So it's not that I don't care about maturity or ripeness,
that I think it really contributes to a cup in the long term.
This brings me to a question. It's actually not for you, but perhaps also for the registrars.
Because we had an issue with Rwandan coffees.
Rwanda?
Yeah, people had problems with the quality of the beans, like the same colour.
Uniform colour.
Yeah, so whenever you use a bigger range of maturity, so if the roasters are
roasting quite light, they would probably have higher content of different color.
Yeah, so and then... And that can add complexity you're saying? That can add a
a lot of, let's say, problems and comments about like inconsistent coffee in their cup.
So I know what you are saying, I understand it, and then from the opposite direction,
if the people roast really very light, yeah, they have like complaints about the quality
of the processed coffee.
So that's just my thought in here.
That's really interesting too because it also depends on, I feel like, at what is your ending
point that the person is saying, like, this is good, this is bad, this is high quality,
this is low quality.
Because it might taste a lot more complex if you have that variety in the coffee.
It might not.
It might taste like all over the place, depending on the coffee.
But if you're looking at it through a color sorter or in the roastery and you see variations
in color, you're going to try and make, like, equalize it.
It reminds me of, I did a roasting, just a local roasting competition one time, and I
sorted my coffee so vigorously before and after roasting.
My coffee was so uniform.
And I didn't do very well.
And then the person who won, I asked, what did you do with it?
And they were like, oh, I left everything in.
I didn't sort anything.
They sorted out chip beans and anything
that was super damaged.
But there was a bunch of pea berries in this coffee.
They left all the pea berries.
They left all of the different sizes.
And of course, it depends on the people
who are tasting the coffee.
But their complexity score was so much higher,
even though their coffee didn't look as uniform.
So yeah, I don't know, depends.
- Well, I think another level of like, you know,
good or bad, you're saying everyone gets to decide,
is like, is this coffee hard to roast?
Maybe it's the most complex, but it's hard to roast
and that makes it bad and low quality.
Or is good quality something that I can set it
and forget it and make a ton of batches.
So it's just being aware.
So I think a lot of the times, my concern is producers
don't realize where their disuniformity, where all of this complexity is coming from.
And so I'm kind of saying something opposite that I've been like hammering for the last
couple of days, which is like uniformity, uniformity, uniformity, right?
I want to get everything the same.
And that's why I talk about washed coffees versus naturals, and I want to bring up the
moisture.
I'm like, be the same, be the same, be the same.
But too much sameness gives you a flat line.
And so in my way, I'm looking at my cost to benefit ratio.
I'm the same in these things, so I
have to bring in more complexity in these other areas
to compensate.
So finding that balance.
So I'm way less uniform on my picking,
and I'm more uniform in my fermentation.
And so you have two columns.
Pick some from column A and some from column B.
Maybe you have way more uniformity in your cherry,
and then you can have a little bit more complexity
in another part and matching the coffee to the customer.
Saying like, what is most valuable to the person
that I want to please?
Is ease of roasting more valuable
or something unique more valuable?
Do they want complexity or do they want...
- Yeah, actually this customer was complaining
because their customers were complaining.
You know, it wasn't about the taste.
It tastes great.
They love the coffee.
They love the price, but because they roast
on the lorry pretty light, so whenever the customers received
a coffee, they were like--
They would just look at it and say, oh.
They had a lot of complaints.
But the coffee was really fantastic.
So that's like roaster education.
So a lot of times, it's the roaster's job
to educate their customers and say, hey, taste it first.
I know it looks this way, but taste it first.
And what I see a lot of times is maybe there's a customer
complaint, a roaster complaint, and they
get shoved back to the producer to say, fix this.
don't make your coffee be like this.
And it's not up to them.
It's like a downstream problem.
So a lot of the times it just keeps
shoved back onto the producer.
And they're like, I don't know what to do.
So a lot of times-- so I know because I get these calls,
because I work with producers, and they say,
I got this feedback from the roaster.
They want the coffee to be more X or Y.
And I said, OK, why?
And they said, they just want it that way.
And I'm like, what do you want?
They're like, this process works for us.
We like it.
So it's a lot of this external pressure.
And they're trying to fix a problem that's like not even their problem, it's somebody
else's problem.
Yeah, I feel the question "why" is always, or many times missing in the conversation,
you know, like, that somebody's saying something, but why do you think this should be working?
Or what, you know, like, and yeah, everybody's just, yeah, thank you.
Yeah.
So my point is not that we should completely throw bricks out and throw away this measurement,
but to put it in context and to say, okay, I'm putting it in this kind of calculation
of all of these other parameters.
Here's my bricks, but what variety is it on?
Here's my bricks, but what time of the season?
Is it early, mid, late?
Here's my bricks, but what's my color?
Here's my bricks, but how was it compared to last season?
it needs to be used in all of these contexts. And again, the high, really high
brix is selecting for a certain population more likely to be defects,
more vinegar, more spoiled fruit. It can also be an indicator of stress, like we
mentioned. If you have a lot of hydric stress, you're gonna have really high
brix because you're gonna be losing all of that water.
So for example, if you have like really plant which is dying but you can see like it has like
ultimately red cherries, you will pick it up and then process it. There will be
significant difference in between regular, very healthy plant.
So this is something Julie and I started to talk about a little bit yesterday because I don't know
what it is in coffee, but in wine I know that we want a significant amount of
stress. We stress the plant on purpose so that it changes its metabolism from
vegetative growth. Like if it's really happy it just makes big beautiful green
leaves but I don't want to harvest leaves I want fruit so we make it stress
so the plants like I'm dying I'm gonna put all my energy into reproducing and
make my fruit better and make my seed stronger so that that makes better wine
so a lot of the times we want in wine to stress our fruit on purpose but if it's
a really delicate balance because yes you're trying to like think that it's
going to die without killing the plant I don't know if that translates to coffee
Julie, do you have any insight?
I don't know, but I don't think so.
But I do know that, like, biologically, coffee wants to stress itself out with its bearing load if the nutrients are available.
So it biologically tends to go that direction.
So I don't know, like, a coffee plant, if it's overbearing and doesn't have the leaf mass to support itself, will just kill itself.
Even if you don't want that tree to die, you're like, "No way, no way."
I don't think, I don't know if it's a good thing for cup quality, but I know it's a biological trait, the way coffee's been bred over time.
Like, more modern cultivars that are overbearing.
So I think what we can say is, coffees don't need help being stressed out.
Coffee trees tend toward stress, whereas grapevines do.
do so stress in wine is a helpful like it's a tool that a lot of winemakers use
and it's not a tool that we need to use in coffee per se so I think stressing
coffee trees out is bad so when you see this indicators of stress
trying doing something to mitigate it so because again like there's all of these
wine tendencies that we could borrow not knowing why
saying like oh stressed vines give the best coffee maybe stress or best wine
stressed vines get the best wine. So maybe stressed coffee plants get the
best coffee and we may accidentally borrow that without questioning it and
saying no it's the opposite. Coffee plants don't need help being stressed out.
So for me again high bricks could be an indicator of like...
I was going to say how I have an anecdotal thing about bricks is I measure it sometimes but I really I don't even like think about it with maturity
because the beginning of my harvest season, when my harvest is probably arguably a little bit less quality
because it's just starting to come in, the bricks are super high, but it's our dry season so it hardly ever rains.
And so since we're a non-irrigated system, I have this connection with water that I can see just through the bricks and the cherry.
And then once the rainy seasons start, the bricks drop, but actually the quality goes up.
It's just a relationship to how much water the plant is uptaking on my farm.
It's kind of wild.
Like you see, I just used bricks as fermentation information instead of how ripe is the cherry at all.
Because it's on my non-irrigated farm completely related to rain, it seems.
I'm not sure, but yeah, that's just anecdotally what I wanted to add.
So a lot of producers still have this idea, and roasters do, higher bricks, and they'll
put that on the website in the bag, like, "Only 28 bricks cherries were used to make
this special lot from wherever."
And not only is the opposite true, but potentially lower bricks can have higher quality.
In the case of Alejandra with her geisha that's at 17, that's way better than her higher bricks,
and would be with the beginning of the season versus the end of the season when it's lower.
So it's a very misleading measurement.
So it's, I just like to say, proceed with caution.
Both when you see that being advertised to you
as a consumer, that this coffee is better
because of tire bricks, to question that.
As a roaster, to buy refractometer to your producers
and ask for a particular measurement.
Valeria was saying that.
Valeria says she was feeling, she's just like,
we keep being asked by clients to do these things
that are making my coffee worse.
lowering the quality of my coffee because they don't understand what they're asking.
But she's on her side she doesn't know how to say that it's not working. Like she also doesn't know
why. She's just like first they do it she's like this person's probably giving me good advice. They
have every good intention but then at the end it doesn't result that way. So they don't know what
they're asking and she also doesn't have the knowledge to for now to say no that's not going
to work or that's not a good idea for these reasons.
So yeah.
I mean, it's probably too tangential to talk about, but I guess along the lines of the
grapes and sweetness and wine, it makes sense because you can assume anything about sweetness.
Yes.
And the idea that a sweet grape is something that attracts animals to it.
But since we're having the seed, what is the correlation between the ripeness of the cherry
and when an animal would want to eat it and poop it out,
and it would grow, like what is it in the seed that's better,
the right, like, when it's like, the ideal time,
what is it that we're able to unlock through the whole process
and roasting and everything else,
it's different when it's less ripe.
Like, I know it's pouring things into it, but why, like,
what is it about, like, the plant putting everything into the seed?
Because obviously there's a realm where it can still be alive and the undergrowth is still popular.
But I guess, I just don't see the correlation between an animal wanting to eat the cherry
versus the flavors that we want being in the seed.
Being in the seed.
Julie, do you have any thoughts?
Our biggest pests that eat our cherries are birds.
And I feel like everything in biology is after sugar.
And so maybe the birds are intuitively
like finding a sugar spot where the coffee's just ripened up
but they need it and want to take it.
Maybe it's easier to pull off the branch.
It could be like a number of things.
Maybe there's bugs around it that are attracting them
or smell or color, but.
- But why is it that the seed,
because like the seed doesn't need to,
like, I mean, the seed doesn't want it.
So like the plant, arguably, doesn't
want the seed to be consumed, roasted and consumed
and things like that.
So that ripeness for the cherry, how
does that correlate to the flavor in the cup?
The plants want the seeds to be consumed, for sure.
Consumed but not destroyed, as in not roasted and ground.
The seed, we want to get through.
So I guess the correlation between the sweetness
and the cherry being in the perfect place versus,
Do we know that's the perfect time?
Like when is that perfect sweetness for a bird?
- Well, I'm hearing two things,
which is one that we've really taken
this connection for granted.
Like it makes sense, so we don't have to question it.
And you're right, like we're taking for granted
that the best time for the seed to be consumed,
like that these two things are converging,
that the plant is like, I'm ready to give my offspring.
And we're like, I'm ready to eat that offspring.
Like these two things maybe don't correlate as well.
We're taking for granted that that's correlating.
But the other thing I'm hearing is that, well, the plant does want the seed to be consumed
because that is a next generation.
And so the difference between being consumed by a bird and being hooped out and having
a new life and getting roasted is no difference.
It is the same thing.
It is being separated from the mother.
So that doesn't really come into consideration.
However, the idea that that is also when we, when it is the tastiest, definitely taking
for granted.
And it may have nothing to do with sugar, it may just be what Julie was saying about
like, it's just when it's softest and easiest to remove.
So when it's easiest to remove, and we've just like made this like false correlation
of like flavor and taste.
I'm also thinking it could be then at that point, the seed is like the most viable to
if it were pooped out somewhere, it would be most viable to germinate in wherever
it was pooped out.
And if we instead intercept it, take it, roast it,
it has the most stuff in there that turns into tasty stuff that we like to drink.
So that if it were earlier in the process, under ripe,
it doesn't have enough stuff that when we apply heat to turn into the tasty stuff
that we like to drink.
And if we waited too long, some of that stuff
that would turn into tasty stuff that we would like to drink
wouldn't be there anymore.
So it would be, theoretically, a correlation
of the viability of the seed to germinate and turn
into a plant has the same stuff that
turns into the stuff when we apply heat
that we like to drink.
And I think that's the question that I have,
is the viability of the seed--
- Yeah.
- Does that correlate to the tastiest?
- Okay, one clue about this,
like one beginning clue is that the higher germination rates
that we have is tastier in like sensory evaluation.
When you have a higher seed viability, it scores higher.
There's a higher cup score there.
Why? I don't know.
Like the working theory is that if the seed is viable
and it's ready to germinate, it's releasing,
it's unlocking those bound carbohydrates
and making them more available for us.
So again, like--
- We co-evolve with the plants, right?
And our taste buds, in a way, co-evolve with the food
and the plants, and the nature of that.
- Yeah, I think that's part of it, too.
But what Kat is saying, in a very accessible way
that I like to think about a lot of these things,
like accumulation of stuff.
Like I just have more stuff.
I have more tools in my backpack,
I've got more baggage, I've got more luggage.
And having more stuff lets you do more things with it.
So it have more potential for reactions.
Doesn't necessarily mean that you're gonna do
good things with it, but it's more likely
having more stuff.
If I have more tools, I'm probably gonna make
more reactions.
And that's the same principle of like seed accumulation
of nutrients or accumulation of carbohydrates in the seed
as what we're trying to do in the fermentation tank.
Where it's like, I just wanna make more stuff,
I wanna make more compounds that I can hopefully
absorb so that in the rest of my seed life, when I'm roasting, when I'm growing, when
I'm aging, I have more stuff that...
So I think of it like we're building a bunch of Legos and then as a coffee's aging, we're
taking them away.
So if I start with a giant pile of Legos, I have way more Legos at the end than if I
started with a smaller pile.
So this accumulation of stuff I think works both in our seed maturity and in our fermentation
accumulation and our aging. So it's not a satisfying answer. I don't know. Like and
again I think you're right. I think it's really helpful to point out like a lot
of this stuff like makes sense so we're just like I don't need to look at that.
Like I just accept and we do that too much in coffee. So like I don't have a
good answer as to why these two things correlate. I just imagine more
carbohydrates available to make more tasty reactions.
Sounds good.
So this one is important for me
because I really want to break the myth
that honey processed and natural coffees taste sweeter
because our sugar is getting into the seed,
which is a conception that a lot of people still have.
They say it's sweeter because the sugar is going inside.
And one thing to keep in mind
is that the other thing that I told you
is like this is a little yeast cell
and the preferred food of the Saccharomyces is a glucose.
So my sucrose is both of my molecules bound together.
My preferred is a glucose.
So the yeast has enzymes to cut that bond
and say, I want my glucose first.
It will also consume fructose, but preferentially glucose.
So the yeast is releasing enzymes to break that bond
to get its favorite food.
And this is the primary metabolism that I talked about,
the alcohol and the CO2.
It's gonna make that, that's just, you know,
basic, it's gonna poop that out.
But to put all of the other stuff,
the organic acids, amino acids, esters, glycerol,
the polysaccharide, all of that is a secondary metabolism.
That's the one that, after a certain amount of generations,
it's just not as good at producing.
So if that's what we're looking for in yeast,
that's how we have to like refresh our fermentations
and why we can't just use the same starter
over and over and over again.
And if you know this process,
if you know that fermentation is always depleting sugar,
then how are these other methods
that have much longer fermentation times,
30 day in terms of the naturals and the honeys,
how can they have,
how can the sweetness be attributed to more sugar
if we're constantly running out of sugar,
we're always depleting sugar?
So sugar can't be,
the glucose and fructose can't be the reason
why these processes taste sweeter.
So one of the things that I like to point to
is the glycerol and the polysaccharides.
Yeasts are really good at producing these molecules
that are like weight molecules.
So you can think about when you have something
that's really thick and syrupy,
you have these like complex chains of carbons
that are just connecting
and they give you the physical sensation
of weight in your mouth.
So if you have that and you have these esters
create fruit flavors, fruity flavors. You get some mango and some pineapple and
maybe some honey flavors. And then you have these two things so your brain kind
of fills in the middle. If you have something that's heavy-bodied and thick
and smells like honey, then your mind says, "Oh, it's sweet. There is
more sugar here," even though all of the sugar is gone or most of the sugar has
been depleted. So I think we have this really bad habit in coffee of talking
about sugar when we should be talking about carbohydrates and talking about
like carbons and we just think sugar and that really puts us in this like really
weird direction where we're talking about complex things in a very simple
way that's actually more confusing. So that's just one of my favorite things
about yeast is that it's a very a very easy way to get those attributes. Like if
If you have a coffee that's very light bodied,
that's very simple,
you might've tasted that in the citric.
The citric that didn't have the fermentation
was very bright and was very clean,
but it didn't have that roundness
and it didn't have that body,
the way that the yeast one did.
That one was a lot more integrated, it was more round.
That's the easiest thing to accomplish with yeast
is body and weight.
So if you have a coffee that's kind of simple and light
and a little bit watery,
then a fermentation with yeast is an easy,
that's like the first thing you'll get.
You may not be like, I want to hit mango,
and like mango may be really hard to get,
but body is a really easy fix.
Not fix, but it's just like an easy component
to like give to the coffee.
The other thing I want to mention is that
because of physics, because of when we're drying coffee
in a honey or a natural, the water,
the direction of the water is out.
Water's coming from inside the seed
out into the environment.
And because sugar is attracted to water,
there's not a world where it would go against gravity,
where water would be going out
and sugar would be going into the seed.
That's just like crazy talk.
So not only are we in a fermentation
depleting our sugar from the outside, right?
The mucilage.
So there's two sugars, again,
because we're not talking about carbohydrates.
We have the glucose and fructose on the outside,
and then we have the carbohydrates inside the seed.
And so the point is that they don't go in
from the mucilage to the seed,
and the ones that are in the seed
could potentially come out
instead of getting more concentrated,
instead of going in, because the water is escaping.
So the other thing,
but we know that amino acids and esters
do, can cross the boundary and can get in.
Those are small enough molecules
that they can get into the seed.
So it's not that there's no transport,
It's just that sugar is not going in.
And the other thing to mention is that
in the study that I'm mentioning here in 2006,
they found that in wet processed coffees,
when they were submerged,
when they had all of that access to water,
they had about up to 90% less glucose and fructose.
They had less, a lot less sugar that was coming out.
And that sounds shocking and terrible,
we have 90% less sugar, but we've all tried a lot of washed coffees that are
incredibly sweet and so having 90% less of a glucose and fructose isn't
affecting the sugar in the way that we think. So we really don't understand
sugar very well in coffee as consumers. We can have, like you would never say a
washed coffee is 90% less sweet than honey or a natural. You can find a lot of
sweetness even though this water allows this kind of reaction to occur.
So, I'm, I, it's tough. I feel like I'm not giving you an answer. I'm just telling you
it's not what we think. I don't know what it is, but it's just not what we think it
is. So we're not at that point yet.
So we're gonna leave the sugar topic for a moment unless you have more questions
about it. Good? Almost lunchtime. So what I do think is really important and super
valuable is pH. Having a pH meter is really a help. It's like having a
flashlight in the dark for your coffee quality. And one of the things that
Alejandra asked is, so previously when producers were so concerned with like
not over fermenting and not having defects, time was a big factor.
I've washed my coffee at 12 hours, I washed my coffee as soon as possible.
Time was the biggest indicator of when we could finish our fermentation.
And now, because we've gotten more sophisticated, a lot of people are using
pH instead of time to end and cut off their fermentation.
So now they say, "I washed my coffee at 4.5. No matter how long it takes, when I
get to 4.5, I washed my coffee," or whatever number they pick.
And that's better, it's an improvement over time, but a lot of times the path to that final number
can be really different. How you got there. Did you stall for a long time and then drop really
quickly at the end? Did you drop like what we had with our yeast, we dropped really quickly and then
we stabilized? Or do you have this like you know really steady dropping line? So my point is with
With Alejandra, she's like looking for consistency.
She wants a good result
and she wants to replicate that good result.
So I said, if you're only looking at your final pH,
if you're only looking at that number,
you're not likely gonna get that reproducibility
because it also matters how you got there.
It matters what road you took.
Your curve can give you a good idea of reproducibility.
So in our lactic,
we actually saw something like the green line.
Like our lactic has been really slow and really sluggish.
It hasn't moved that much,
but our yeast had a huge drop in the beginning
of from like five to like 4.7.
And then we've kind of been really steady towards the end.
So those are gonna have different results.
So the point is tracking your curve lets you know
if I have a good result and I like it
and I wanna do it again, I can't just get to 4.5.
I wanna help replicate how I got to 4.5 last time.
Yeah?
And if it starts going off, like say you had really good results with the green line and
you want to reproduce that, but it starts going to the red line, how can you correct
for that?
So it is pretty difficult, but for the green line, we know we got there because our container
was really small.
So maybe splitting up your fermentation instead of being this like big vat, if you really
want to replicate a line let's say okay maybe I'm gonna split this into two
tanks or we know that this line was also really sluggish to start because it was
a smaller fermentation and the temperature was like more susceptible
temperature it didn't hold the temperature as well and it cooled off
more quickly so maybe finding a way to cool off your larger fermentation maybe
mixing it more to let some of that heat escape maybe putting something cooling
around the outside something to mimic what's happening in that smaller
fermentation.
You can do it! So the other thing, again with bricks, it's not that important what
the number is as much as the trend. What is the behavior of it? And so I
yeah I find this to be much more useful and more interesting to say what did my
bricks do? Did I have a whole fermentation where it never changed and nothing happened? Did I have
a fermentation where it dropped in the beginning and then it stabilized or could it potentially
have gone up and back down? So this blue line is interesting. This blue line is very confusing
because you'd say, "Well, I have a certain amount of sugar. How do I get more of it? Why would my
bricks go up to come back down?" And that's usually due to the non-homogenous nature of
coffee fermentations. So you have all the sugar like in a jelly trapped around the seed and then
water. So in the beginning we're mostly just measuring our water. As our fermentation is going
and the mucilage is like dissolving, now it's more available to measure so it goes up. So it's not
that we have more, it just became more available. And the green line potentially, if we have a
fermentation that's really active and maybe our sugar isn't growing anywhere, it's not depleting,
it's not reducing, it could be that you have a bacteria, another organism that just doesn't
care about sugar, that is, you know, reducing your lactic acid or that is reducing malic acid,
that's using something else as its fuel and that could give you a clue. Maybe I don't have yeast,
maybe I didn't dominate the way that I thought I did, there's something else going on here that
is just ignoring my sugar but still fermenting, so it wouldn't be my Saccharomyces. So that could
That could be a clue with, okay, my brix isn't going anywhere, but maybe my acidity, maybe
my acid looks like this blue line where it's like a zoom all the way down where you've
got all of this acidity increasing.
So you could use both of these things to say, how do I get the result that I got last time?
How do I mimic these things, if that's what you're looking for?
And then this is just the last point where we were talking about oxygen, where you can
see this metabolism of the fermentation and taking my glucose, changing up, rearranging
my carbons, spitting out my ethanol, spitting out my CO2, all of that doesn't require oxygen
inside the cell. Oxygen inside for the metabolism of the organisms, not necessary. That's why
we say any fermentation is anaerobic by definition. So a natural process that's sitting on top
above a raised bed and all of this oxygen is still experiencing anaerobic fermentation
inside the cell.
Compared to the opposite respiration, where here we can clearly see oxygen being an electron
receptor and electron donor, it's going...
So this is just to show contrast, not that you need to understand respiration, just to
say why we say that anaerobic fermentation is redundant, because it's part of the definition.
And now what John Michael brought up is, well, we say it because we're usually trying to
describe the environment because the environment will give you some indication of the flavor
results, like anaerobic coffees taste this way, some predictability.
And so what I was showing him is that for oxygen requirements, different microbes have
different needs.
They have different preferences.
So something like acetobacter that gives us our vinegar, that gives us our spoilage, is
an obligate arogue, meaning it only works when you have a lot of oxygen available.
That's what, it's like, that's how it thrives.
That's why in these test tubes, it's only, the little dots are found only on the surface,
right?
And so this is where your kombucha comes in.
In your kombucha, the top of your SCOBY has one population and the bottom of your SCOBY
has a different population.
That's why you have those mixed microbial fermentations.
Then we have, obviously, our microaerophiles.
So at different oxygen concentrations,
different microbes tend to thrive.
Just like microbes have temperature preferences,
some work better when it's hot, some work better when it's cold,
some work better or worse at different oxygen concentrations.
Which is why you can have a fermentation that you
think is one thing, and it's just
like every layer, every couple of inches, there's a different activity, there's a
different dominant microbe. And then we have the other two that are
really important copies. We have the Cetobacter that's really present in
naturals, and then we have Saccharomyces cerevisiae, this is our yeast that we're
using, and then our Lactobacillus that we have in our lactic fermentation. And
both of these can be found throughout the test tube for very different reasons.
So the Saccharomyces is facultative, meaning I need oxygen when I'm in my
reproduction mode to make more new yeast, but when I'm metabolizing, when I'm eating,
I don't use the oxygen. So facultative means if it's there, I use it. If it's not
there, I switch my metabolism. So I can do both. I use it, I don't use it.
This Lactobacillus is aerotolerant, meaning I don't care. Like it's not even a
thing that's like in my atmosphere. It's like someone who doesn't drink beer. It's
like there's beer there, doesn't matter
'cause I don't drink it.
So if there's too much beer, if there's no beer,
it doesn't matter, it's not important.
And so both of these can be present.
So this is why a lot of times when someone says,
oh, I did an anaerobic fermentation,
I removed all the oxygen,
that's why I know it's lactic acid bacteria.
I'm like, no, you don't.
Just because you remove the oxygen,
there's plenty of things that could be fermenting
that don't require oxygen.
It could be a totally yeast dominated fermentation
that you're ascribing to lactic acid.
So I think this is why we should be really,
I don't know, hesitant or a lot more thoughtful
about how we name fermentations,
because you really don't know
if something is a lactic bacteria,
unless you're inoculating,
unless you open up a packet of lactic bacteria
and inoculated it.
Just by changing the environment, you don't know.
So I called this one lactic because we went the extra step.
Not only do we have a low oxygen environment,
we went the extra step of adding salt
to reduce, to have a higher filter,
and I still say, maybe, it's a possibly lactic fermentation
because I didn't sanitize,
I didn't remove anything else.
So again, it's sort of like,
I don't think we need to be so overly specific in coffee
because it's not accurate and it's not helpful.
We're not like, we're just sounding,
trying to sound cooler than what's actually going on.
So the point of this slide is just
to say that whether you, as an agent, add oxygen,
remove oxygen, purge with whatever,
just because you're doing that, the microbes that are there
maybe don't care.
Maybe it doesn't matter that you did that.
This is the last slide.
So this is just to say that when we're--
like, the problem with coffee is we talk about oxygen
in one parameter.
We're just talking about it in the environment.
And there's like three levels.
There's three layers of oxygen that are important,
whether it's--
OK, the fermentation, always anaerobic.
Then we have our environment.
Do we put it on a raised bed, or do we
put it in the tank that's sealed?
And then the microbe itself.
So the two contrasts are a natural dry process or a yeast process.
So in both cases, the fermentation is anaerobic,
because that's the definition.
But now my environment is different.
One has high oxygen and one has low oxygen, 20% of air,
and the below 2% of these fermentations.
And then we have our microbes, where one is an obligate arobe
and the other one is facultative.
So this isn't to say that we should label fermentations
even more specifically.
It's to say that the way that we're labeling them
is not that helpful.
And so this is more like,
you're not supposed to know this or memorize this.
It's just to know all of the things that we don't know.
It's just to say, maybe using anaerobic
to describe a fermentation isn't helpful at all.
So it's not to like double down and be more specific.
It's to like back up and say,
well, what are we trying to communicate
when we're describing our fermentation.
- With the comparison there between Acid Reactor and...
- Saccharomyces?
- Yeah.
Could either of those have lactobacilli in them as well?
Since it could be either of those?
- Exactly, because especially in the dry process
that's in contact with the skin,
that's where most of the lactobacillus is,
the peels of and coming in from the field. So there could be a lot of lactobacillus in the natural.
They could have even more lactobacillus presence in those that has a skin than in something that
you've pulped and is anaerobic. Yes. So calling a fermentation lactic for me again is...maybe.
Just like let's not be as like certain as a lot of people come out like "Gung Ho,
this is what it is. It's like with biology, maybe, but probably a lot more other stuff is happening.
And that's the end of this section. So now I can go to lunch, then we have one more session after
lunch where we're going to talk about, yeah, sources of inconsistent fermentation. We're
going to start to talk a little bit about drying in the afternoon, and then we're going to have our
picture sharing. So have you talked to Nick? Nick has started a Google folder so you can dump your
pictures in there. So we've asked Julie to share her farm. Cecil, we're going to ask you to share
some pictures from Jamaica. You guys can share some pictures from Thailand. We'd love to see
what your farms look like, what your facilities look like, maybe your tanks you can share,
your drawing space, something like that.
So I'm asking five to 10 pictures,
don't you think show, you can share with the group.
- Even when you say share, you mean to see everyone?
- Yeah, we're gonna see them appear all together.
- Show and tell.
If anyone else has anything to show and tell.
- Party pictures.
- Yeah.
[BLANK_AUDIO]